RFC-006: add Activities and Plans in renku.api (#7)
SwissDataScienceCenter/renku-rfc: design/006-renku-api-activities-plans/006-renku-api-activities-plans.md

with their child properties.

## Motivation

As users use more workflow features and more complex workflow pipelines, a way
for programatically seeing workflows in the current project becomes more
important.
Reading Activities and Plans allows meta-analysis in repositories, such as
summarizing over multiple executions of the same Plan.
Additionally, it allows writing scripts that detect existing workflows and
to then shell out to `renku workflow execute` to run Plans dynamically.

## Design Detail

Add new classes to `renku.api`:

- Activity
- Usage
- Generation
- ParameterValue
- Plan
- CompositePlan
- Input
- Output
- Parameter
- Mapping
- Link

The classes wrap core renku classes and expose a simplified subset of
properties.

### Getting Activities and Plans

```Python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
activities_by_usage = Activity.filter_by_usage(path="data/my.csv")
activities_by_usage_parent = Activity.filter_by_usage(path="data/", exact=False)
activities_by_generation = Activity.filter_by_generation(path="data/my.csv")
activities_by_generation_parent = Activity.filter_by_generation(path="data/", with_children=True)

> activities_by_parameter = Activity.filter_py_parameter(name="lr", value=0.7)

Author: yes I think we can extend it to accept simple values, lists or callables. That should cover most cases. We should also be able to do that for usages/generations.

## Drawbacks

While we can use indices for `filter_by_usage` and `filter_by_generation`,
plain `Activity.list()` on a large repository could potentially use many
resources and not be very efficient.

Most filtering with this solution has to be done by the user in their code, as
we don't provide a generic query interface that could benefit from indices.

## Rationale and Alternatives

While it is a bit on the simple side, it should cover all use-cases and map
very closely to our internal implementation, making it easy to maintain and
extend.

I also considered adding something with a custom query DSL, e.g.

```
Activity.list({"usages": {"path": "data/my.csv"}})
```

or

```
Activity.list(where="usages.path in 'data/my.csv' and started_at > '2022-01-01'")
```

but that would add quite a bit of overhead in development time and force users
to learn the DSL, adding cognitive overhead.

I also considered renaming `usages` and `generations` on `Activity` to `inputs`
and `outputs`, but that would be ambiguous with the use on `Plan` and I
couldn't think of other names that are easier to understand, to be worth the

> added complexity of having names diverging from `renku.core`

Author: The existing Input/Output/Parameter map directly to a Plan input/output/parameter. I.e. those classes would be extended for this (and renamed to InputField?)

- Start Date: 23.03.2022
- Status: Proposed

# Using Plans and Activities through renku.api

## Summary

Add support for accessing Activities and Plans in the current project, along
with their child properties.

## Motivation

As users use more workflow features and more complex workflow pipelines, a way
for programatically seeing workflows in the current project becomes more
important.
Reading Activities and Plans allows meta-analysis in repositories, such as
summarizing over multiple executions of the same Plan.
Additionally, it allows writing scripts that detect existing workflows and
to then shell out to `renku workflow execute` to run Plans dynamically.

## Design Detail

Add new classes to `renku.api`:

- Activity
- Usage
- Generation
- ParameterValue
- Plan
- CompositePlan
- Input
- Output
- Parameter
- Mapping
- Link

The classes wrap core renku classes and expose a simplified subset of
properties.

### Getting Activities and Plans

```Python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
activities_by_input = Activity.filter_by_input(path="data/my.csv")

> activities_by_input_parent = Activity.filter_by_input(path="data/", exact=False)

Author: Maybe you're only interested in activities that used the whole directory, not just a single file inside of it.

There's also some edge cases around if I once had a file called `data` that I then deleted and created a directory called `data` in its place, though those don't matter that much.

activities_by_output = Activity.filter_by_output(path="data/my.csv")
activities_by_output_parent = Activity.filter_by_output(path="data/", with_children=True)
activities_by_parameter = Activity.filter_py_parameter(name="lr", value=0.7)
```

`.list()` returns all activities in the project.

`.filter_by_input()` and `.filter_by_output()` return all activities
that used a certain input or produced a certain output. Setting
`with_children=True` means that if a directory is passed, all activities for
that directory and its children are returned.

`.filter_py_parameter()` filters activities based on parameters' names and/or
values.

Parameters `path`, `name` and `value` should accept plain values, list of
values or a `Callable` accepting the value and returning a `bool`, to filter
on a single value, list of values or custom condition, respectively.

```Python
from renku.api import Plan

all_active_plans = Plan.list()

> deleted_plans = Plan.list(include_deleted=True)

Author: active and deleted. I'll change the name.

#### Plan

| API Property  | Wrapped property           | Type                      |
|---------------|----------------------------|---------------------------|
| name          | name                       | string                    |
| description   | description                | string                    |
| date_created  | date_created               | datetime                  |
| keywords      | keywords                   | List[string]              |
| input_fields  | inputs                     | List[renku.api.InputField]|
| output_fields | outputs                    | List[renku.api.OutputField]|
| parameter_fields | parameters                 | List[renku.api.ParameterField]|
| command       | to_argv(with_streams=True) | string                    |
| keywords      | keywords                   | List[string]              |
| success_codes | success_codes              | List[int]                 |
| deleted       | invalidated_at is not None | bool                      |
| activities    | lazy, filter through ActivityGateway | List[renku.api.Activity] |

> ##### InputField (formerly renku.api.Input)

Author: Originally, I kept the name `Input` on there and had `Usage` on the activity. But `Usage` is not as self-explanatory as `Input` plus users of the API shouldn't be familiar with PROV-O, so after discussion with @lokijuhy we decided on using `Input` on `Activity` and calling it `InputField` on the `Plan`.

Another option I thought of this morning is keeping `Input` on `Plan` and naming it `UsedInput` and `CreatedOutput` on Activity. More verbose but then people don't need to migrate their scripts.

> ##### InputField (formerly renku.api.Input)

Reviewer: I think `UsedInput` and `CreatedOutput` are definitely easier to understand

> ##### InputField (formerly renku.api.Input)

Author: I'm fine with either. @almutlue @lokijuhy do you have any preference?

> ##### InputField (formerly renku.api.Input)

Reviewer 2: (Sorry- my GitHub notifications system is still a work in progress! 🤔) `UsedInput` and `CreatedOutput` seem intuitive to me!

| parameters    | mapped_parameters             | renku.api.(Input,Output,Parameter,Mapping) |

##### Link

| API Property  | Wrapped property              | Type                                       |
|---------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| source        | source                        | renku.api.(Output,Parameter)               |
| sinks         | sinks                         | List[renku.api.(Input,Parameter)]          |

## Drawbacks

While we can use indices for `filter_by_usage` and `filter_by_generation`,
plain `Activity.list()` on a large repository could potentially use many
resources and not be very efficient.

Most filtering with this solution has to be done by the user in their code, as
we don't provide a generic query interface that could benefit from indices.

## Rationale and Alternatives

While it is a bit on the simple side, it should cover all use-cases and map
very closely to our internal implementation, making it easy to maintain and
extend.

I also considered adding something with a custom query DSL, e.g.

```
Activity.list({"usages": {"path": "data/my.csv"}})
```

or

```

> Activity.list(where="usages.path in 'data/my.csv' and started_at > '2022-01-01'")

Author: it's not a bad idea, just difficult to implement

> Activity.list(where="usages.path in 'data/my.csv' and started_at > '2022-01-01'")

Reviewer: sure - my point was just that it's worth leaving it in the RFC.

        + string name
        + string description
        + Path value
        + renku_api-Input_Output_Parameter_Mappingparameters
    }
    class  Link {
        <<Connections hidden for readability>>
        +renku_api-Output_Parameter source
        +List-renku_api-Input_Parameter sinks
    }
    class Activity {
        +datetime started_at
        +datetime ended_at
        +string-name-email user
        +dict annotations
        +List-renku_api_Input inputs
        +List-renku_api_Output outputs
        +List-renku_api_ParameterValue parameters
        +renku_api_Plan base_plan      
        +renku_api_Plan executed_plan  
        +List-renku_api_Activity preceding_activities
        +List-renku_api_Activity following_activities
        +List-renku_api_Activity list()
        +List-renku_api_Activity filter_by_input()
        +List-renku_api_Activity filter_by_output()
        +List-renku_api_Activity filter_by_parameter()
    }
    class Input {
      +string checksum
      +string path
    }
    class Output {
      +string checksum
      +string path
    }
    class ParameterValue {
      +renku_api-Input_Output_Parameter parameter          
      +Any value  
    }

>     Dataset --> DatasetFile : files

Reviewer 2: It seems to me that there should be a connection between `Dataset` or `DatasetFile` and `Input`/`Output`. For example, if a user does `Dataset.list()`, they should then be able to get to which activities the dataset was used in. Perhaps, there could be `Dataset.usage -> List[Input, Output]`?

Author: We could add that, but we don't have that in the core code at the moment. We could certainly hack it together, like `Dataset.usage = [u for f in dataset.file for a in Activity.filter_by_usage(path=f) for u in Activity.inputs if u.path==f.path]`, though that wouldn't tell you if a file at a commit in the dataset is the same as the file used in an Activity at another commit.

I think this would be more complex and deserves its own RFC, adding the link properly in our internal metadata first plus adding corresponding CLI commands, then thinking about adding it to `renku.api`

Reviewer 2: Yes, that makes sense to me to keep this linking out of scope for this RFC, and leave it to a future RFC 👍

```Python
from renku.api import Plan

all_active_plans = Plan.list()
deleted_plans = Plan.list(include_deleted=True)
```

`.list()` returns all plans in the project. `include_deleted=True` would
also return plans that were deleted.

```Python
from renku.api import Project

status = Project().status()
```

`.status()` returns

### Viewing the Inputs, Outputs, and Parameters of Plans and Activities
To see the names and default values of all the input, output, or parameters fields in a Plan:

```python
from renku.api import Plan

all_active_plans = Plan.list()
my_plan = all_active_plans[0]

input_fields_list = my_plan.input_fields
output_fields_list = my_plan.output_fields
parameter_fields_list = my_plan.parameter_fields

# print Input fields and their default values
for input_field in input_fields_list:
    print(f"{input_field.name}: {input_field.value})
```

And to see the input or output filepaths associated with an activity:

```python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
my_activity = all_activities[0]

input_files = my_activity.inputs
output_files = my_activity.outputs
for f in input_files:

>     print(f"{f.field.name}: {f.path}")

Author: It'd entail parsing the field (which can contain variables, datetime format strings  etc.) against the path of an input/output to match them, which is probably rather tricky.

Like if I had a hardcoded `myfile-2019-04-01.txt` and a field `myfile-{yyyy-MM-dd}.txt` that I run today (creating an output `myfile-2022-04-04.txt`), how would I tell that  `myfile-2022-04-04.txt` is what matches the field but `myfile-2019-04-01.txt` doesn't, things like that.

>     print(f"{f.field.name}: {f.path}")

Reviewer 2: Ok. I'll remove this example and the connections in the diagram.

parameters = my_Activity.parameters
for p in parameters:
    print(p.value)

```

To see the actual values that were specified for the input and output fields at the
execution of the activity (the input & output _field values_ may be different from
the input and output _paths_ if the fields were interpretted. For example, if an
`OutputField` was set to `my_file_{yyyy-mm-dd}.txt`, then the value in the
`Outputs` list would be `my_file_2022-03-30.txt`):

```python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
my_activity = all_activities[0]
executed_plan = my_activity.executed_plan

> # ??? what is the return value of `Activity.executed_plan`? 

Reviewer 2: What is the return value of `Activity.executed_plan`?

| inputs       | usages           | List[renku.api.Input]          |
| outputs      | generations      | List[renku.api.Output]         |
| parameters   | parameters       | List[renku.api.FieldValue] |
| base_plan    | association.plan | renku.api.Plan                 |
| executed_plan| plan_with_values | renku.api.Plan                 |
| preceding_activities | lazy, through ActivityGateway | List[renku.api.Activity] |
| following_activities | lazy, through ActivityGateway | List[renku.api.Activity] |

##### Input

| API Property | Wrapped property | Type   |
|--------------|------------------|--------|
| checksum     | entity.checksum  | string |
| path         | entity.path      | string |

##### Output

| API Property | Wrapped property | Type   |
|--------------|------------------|--------|
| checksum     | entity.checksum  | string |
| path         | entity.path      | string |

##### FieldValue

| API Property | Wrapped property                                                           | Type                               |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|

> | parameter    | parent_activity.association.plan.(inputs,outputs,parameters)[parameter_id] | renku.api.(Input,Output,Parameter) |

Author: I've updated it.

my_plan = all_active_plans[0]

input_fields_list = my_plan.input_fields
output_fields_list = my_plan.output_fields
parameter_fields_list = my_plan.parameter_fields

# print Input fields and their default values
for input_field in input_fields_list:
    print(f"{input_field.name}: {input_field.value})
```

And to see the input or output filepaths associated with an activity:

```python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
my_activity = all_activities[0]

input_files = my_activity.inputs
output_files = my_activity.outputs
for f in input_files:
    print(f"{f.path}")

parameters = my_Activity.parameters
for p in parameters:
    print(f"{p.field.name}: {p.value}")

```

To see the actual values that were specified for the input and output fields at the
execution of the activity (the input & output _field values_ may be different from
the input and output _paths_ if the fields were interpretted. For example, if an
`OutputField` was set to `my_file_{yyyy-mm-dd}.txt`, then the value in the
`Outputs` list would be `my_file_2022-03-30.txt`):

```python
from renku.api import Activity

all_activities = Activity.list()
my_activity = all_activities[0]

> executed_plan = my_activity.executed_plan
> # ??? what is the return value of `Activity.executed_plan`?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executed_plan = my_activity.executed_plan
base_plan = my_activity.base_plan
for i, ex_pf in enumerate(executed_plan.parameter_fields):
    base_pf = base_plan.parameter_fields[i]
    print("Plan executed with the following parameters (default in parens)"
    print(f"{exec_pf.value} ({base_rf.value)}")
```
Re executed plans- is this how it would work to compare base vs executed plan parameters?

Author: yes, exactly (plus the same for input fields and output fields).

In our codebase this corresponds to:

```
executed_plan = my_activity.plan_with_values

for i, p in enumerate(executed_plan.parameters):
    print("Plan executed with the following parameters (default in parens)"
    print(f"{p.actual_value} ({p.default_value)}")
```

Author: I've replaced it with just `executed_command` as discussed over lunch

Reviewer 2: 🌟

activities_by_input = Activity.filter_by_input(path="data/my.csv")
activities_by_input_parent = Activity.filter_by_input(path="data/", exact=False)
activities_by_output = Activity.filter_by_output(path="data/my.csv")

> activities_by_output_parent = Activity.filter_by_output(path="data/", exact=True)

Reviewer: sorry, I'm confused by this change. `with_children=True` and `exact=True` seem to be doing the opposite... Or maybe I don't understand what `exact` is supposed to be doing?

Author: my bad... I blame monday mornings.
